@node aparse
@chapter arg_parser, Command line arguments

arg_parser parses command line arguments that follow posix long-name
options.  That is a double dash followed by the argument and,
optionally, followed by an equals sign and a value.  That is
     --option[=value].

@menu
* Overview::
* API::
@end menu

@node Overview
@section Overview

arg_parser presents an application programming interface:

@enumerate
@item
Create a parser object with ap∆init.
@item
Define options with ap∆new_option.
@item
Parse the command line with ap∆parse.
@item
Test for errors with ap∆has_errors.
@item
Test for help request wtih ap∆has_help.
@item
Get option values with ap∆get_option_value.
@end enumerate

For instance:

@example
po←ap∆init 'Bill''s application'
po←po ap∆new_option 'name' 'first' 'type' 'string' 'help' 'This application is helpless..'
po←po ap∆new_option 'name' 'second' 'type' 'boolean' 'help' 'Do you agree that it is helpless?'
po←ap∆parse po
⍎(ap∆has_errors po)/'⍞←ap∆get_errors  po ◊ →0'
⍎(ap∆has_help po)/'⍞←ap∆help po ◊ →0'
First←po ap∇get_option_value 'first'
Second←po ap∆get_option_value 'second'
@end example

   arg_parser uses both the utl and lex workspace.  As shipped the
arg_parser.apl file copies these utilities into its workspace.  APL may
not be able to find these utilities at run time.  We recomend copying
all three apl files into your script file to avoid any confusion.

@node API
@section API

@deffn ∇ parser_object ← ap∆init name

Function returns a new parser object

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ parser_object ← parser_object ap∆new_option alist or lexicon

Function adds a new option to the parser instance.  The object
defined in the right argument is a list of name value pairs for the
following names:

@itemize @bullet
@item
name (required)
@item
type (required)
@item
help (optional)
@item
value (provided by the parser)
@end itemize

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ parser_object ← ap∆parse parser_object

Function examines the command line, confirms that command line
options have been defined with new_option; that string type options
have value and that boolen options do not.  It then saves the given
values.

Function sets errors true when it detects errors and sets help true
if the operator included -help on the command line.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ value←parser_object ap∆get_option_value name

Function returns the value of an option.  If a string option was
not on the command line, ⍬ will be returned.  If a boolean option
was one the command line 1 (True) will be returned, if not, 0 will
be returned.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ boolean ← ap∆has_errors parser_object

Functions returns whether or not an error was found on the command
line.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ error_msg ← ap∆get_errors parser_object

Function returns an error message about each error found.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ boolean ← ap∆has_help parser_object

Function returns whether or not help was requested.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ help_message ap∆help parser_object

Function returns a help message showing each defined object.

@end deffn

