@node wblg
@chapter web_log -- parse web server logs

web_log parses web server logs in the common format.  Web servers keep a
log of requests made of the server and the servers response.  Analyzing
those logs may confirm the relative popularity of a site monitoring
those logs may yield insight into what content changes were well
received.

   The process of parsing a log is load the log into the current
workspace with function logŌłåloadFile, apply several tests to the file
and remove irrelevant entries, and count the number of entries.

   To that end web_log provides a function, logŌłåfilter_hits, to remove
entries that I thought were not actual visits to a site.  Each line of
this function applies a test to each line of the log using one of two
operators, logŌłåfilter and logŌłånot_filter.  To use logŌłåfilter_hits call
it with a left argument of your ip address and a right argument of the
log returned by logŌłåloadFile.  viz.:

@example
      accessŌåÉlogŌłåloadFile '/dilworth/www.dalywebandedit.com/logs/access_log.2022-06-30'
      ŌŹ┤access
217
      ŌŹ┤'68.81.178.238' logŌłåfilter_hits access
53
@end example

   logŌłåfilter_hits is a good example of how to use this workspace.  It
applies a series of tests to the log data, removing lines as it does its
work.

@example
      ŌłćlogŌłåfilter_hits[ŌÄĢ]Ōłć
    Ōłć
[0]   newŌåÉip logŌłåfilter_hits old
[1]     ŌŹØ Function returns the number of page requests
[2]     newŌåÉ200 logŌłåtest_status logŌłåfilter old
[3]     newŌåÉ'bot' 'spider' 'google' 'crawler' logŌłåtest_agent_contents logŌłånot_filter new
[4]     newŌåÉ'js' 'css' 'jpg' 'gif' 'ico' 'png' logŌłåtest_suffix logŌłånot_filter new
[5]     newŌåÉip logŌłåtest_ip logŌłånot_filter new
[6]     newŌåÉ'/wordpress1/wp-cron.php' logŌłåtest_file logŌłånot_filter new
    Ōłć
@end example

   logŌłåfilter and logŌłånot_filter are operators that apply a test to each
line of the log.  logŌłåfilter returns lines where the test is true while
logŌłånot_filter returns lines where the test is false.

   web_log provides a series of tests.  Each test's name starts with
'logŌłåtest_'.  Provided tests are:

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉstring logŌłåtest_agent_contents log_line

Each log line contains an agent field.  This test is true when the
supplied string can be found in the agent field.  In
logŌłåfilter_hits we remove requests from spiders, crawlers and bots
by looking for these name in the agent fields

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉfname logŌłåtest_file log_line

Each log line contains a target field, or what the client
requested.  This test is true if fname is that target.  The test
ignores the CGI query that might be included in the target.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉhost logŌłåtest_host log_line

Each log line has a referrer which if present is the URL of the web
page that contained the link the client clicked on.  The test is
true if the host matches the host in the URL.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉip logŌłåtest_ip log_line

The log line includes the ip address of the client and this test is
true when the line's ip address is in the set of ip addresses
supplied.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉlogŌłåtest_not_referred log_line

This test returns true if the referrer field is blank.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉ integer logŌłåtestŌłåstatus log_line

The line's status field contains an integer, defined by the
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). A code of 200, OK, means this
server supplied a page.  Wikipedia has a complete list of codes.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć boolŌåÉsuffixes logŌłåtest_suffix log_line

Function tests if the file name from the target field has a suffix
in the list of supplied suffixes.

@end deffn

   There are ten fields in each log line.  The web_log workspace
provides a function for each field.

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåip log_line

Function returns the client's ip address.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåuser log_line

Function returns the client's user name.  This field is populated
only when the server requires login using HTTP.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåtime log_line

Function returns the time stamp in the log line.  The time stamp is
generally in coordinated universal time.  The next field, time zone
is the adjustment to local time.

The workspace also provides logŌłåParsedTime which returns a vector
of five integers: year month day hour second.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåzone log-line

The adjustment needed to apply to UTC for local time.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłårequest log-line

The HTTP request.  An HTTP request is a three part datum.  The
first part is the HTTP method, the second the requested URL, and
the third the version of HTTP.

HTTP defines 'POST' 'GET' among others as methods.

web_log provides the functions logŌłåmethod and logŌłåtarget for the
first two parts.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåstatus log-line

Function returns the HTTP status code that the server used to
respond to this request.  The status code is an integer defined by
HTTP. 200, OK and 404, NOT FOUND are the most usual.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåsize log-line

Function returns the count of bytes returned by the server to the
client.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåreferrer log-line

This function returns the URL of the page the client clicked on to
make the current request.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć logŌłåagent log-line

The agent field contains information about the program on the
client's computer that made the request.

@end deffn

