@node wp
@chapter wp Workspace

This is a workspace for printing arrays (on paper).  It offers control
over many aspects of the printed page.

   The workspace generates an HTML page which can then be loaded into
one's browser and printed.

@menu
* Howto::  Create a report, basic instructions.
* Init::  Create a blank report.
* Set data::  Add an array of data.
* Attributes::  Data must have attributes to describe formatting.
* Stylesheet::  A style sheet describes formatting for a class of data.
* Required Classes::  Parts of the report that require their own classes.
* Other Tweaks::  Other things to try.
* Distances::  Units of measure in a class.
@end menu

@node Howto
@section Howto

Reports are a complex data structure initiated and maintained through
functions in the wp workspace.

   A report consists of an array, report heading, and stylesheet.  For
each cell in the array additional attributes can be saved for formatting
the report cell by cell.

The basic process is:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Create the report with wpŌłåinit 'Report Name'
@item
Add the array to print with wpŌłåsetData
@item
Add attributes to cells in the array.  Attributes identify the
format strings for numbers and the applicable stylesheet classes.
@item
Create or modify a stylesheet.
@item
Generate the HTML for the report with wpŌłåhtmlŌłåassemble.
@end itemize

@node Init
@section Initiating the report

Use the function wpŌłåinit to create a report.  Init requires a short
character string as its sole argument and will print that string in the
report as an identifier for the report.

   The report itself is a lexicon of Id, Data, Attributes, Stylesheet,
Head_ln01 through Head_ln03, and Author.  wpŌłåinit will use the
environment's USER for the Author.

@node Set data
@section Adding data to your report

By default, a report's data is a single cell of 0.

   wp requires an array of rank 2 and expects that descriptions of the
rows and columns will be included in the array.  There is no enforced
limit on the size of the array.  However, the target browser that
displays the array may limit what you can put on the screen.

   The HTML coding is designed to allow the browser to determine column
widths, text wrapping within a cell and other features.  As the browser
window size is changed the browser should reformat the report.

   Users experienced in cascading style sheets can add style sheet
classes to establish actual widths, heights and placements for a more
fixed presentation @ref{Stylesheet}.

@node Attributes
@section Attributes

An attribute is a name-value pair.  Each cell can have a list of
attributes.  Two are in general use 'format' and 'class'.  Other
attributes will be passed to your browser as attributes of the cell.
For example a cell has three attributes, format, class and passed.  the
coded HTML would be:

@example
<td class=''number'' passed=''user-defined''>',
CF14.2 fmt cell_amount,
'</td>...</tr>'
@end example

   The format attribute is used by the workspace to format the number of
the cell.  APL2's format by example ('55,550.00' ŌŹĢ number) and function
fmt @ref{fmt} can be used.

   The class attribute selects the style sheet class to use for the cell
@ref{Stylesheet}.

Accessor functions for attributes have a prefix wpŌłåattrŌłå.  They are:

@deffn Ōłć report wpŌłåattrŌłågetCellAttr row_number column_number

Function returns a lexicon (@ref{lex}) of attributes.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć report wpŌłåattrŌłåsetCellAttr row_number Column_number lexicon

Function adds, or replaces the name value pair.  The function
expects a lexicon of name value pairs.  For example:

@example
rptŌåÉrpt wpŌłåattrŌłåsetCellAttr 15 3,ŌŖélexŌłåfrom_alist 'format' 'CF10.2' 'class' 'number'
@end example

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć report wpŌłåattrŌłågetQuadAttr start_row start_column end_row end_column

Function returns a portion of the Attribute array.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć report wpŌłåattrŌłåsetQuadAttr start_row start_column end_row end_column encapsulated_lexicon(s)

Funtion sets a rectangular portion of the Attribute array.  If one
lexicon is given that lexicon will be copied to each cell in the
rectangle.  If more than one lexicon is given, the size and shape
of the final argument must match the size and shape of the
rectangle.

@end deffn

@node Stylesheet
@section Stylesheet

The style sheet is a lexicon of classes that describe how to present a
cell in the data.  Each class within the sheet is a lexicon of
properties.  An example style sheet is returned by the function
wpŌłådefaultSS.

   Properties are defined in the global variable wpŌłåsspŌłåpropertyList
which is derived from the W3.com cascading style sheet standards.  The
standards define what values each property may take.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Create a style sheet wpŌłåssŌłåinit or wpŌłådefaultSS.
@item
Create classes with wpŌłåsscŌłåinit
@item
Add properties to the class.
@item
Add classes to the spread sheet.
@item
Assign the spreadsheet to the report
@end itemize

@deffn Ōłć wpŌłåssŌłåinit

Function returns an empty style sheet.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć wpŌłådefaultSS

Function returns a style sheet with classes defined for a typical
array.

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć wpŌłåsscŌłåinit

Function returns a new style sheet class.

@end deffn

@deffn class wpŌłåsscŌłåassignProp Property

Function adds a property to a class.  Properties are name-value
pairs.  For instance:

@example
r4ŌåÉwpŌłåssrŌłåinit '.page-head'
r4ŌåÉr4 wpŌłåssrŌłåassignProp 'font-size' 'large'
@end example

@end deffn

@deffn Ōłć StyleSheet wpŌłåssŌłåassign Class

Assign a class to a stylesheet.  Function will silently replace an
existing class.

@example
ssŌåÉss wpŌłåssŌłåassignClass r4
@end example

@end deffn

@node Required Classes
@section Required Classes

Parts of the final report require their own class.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Body is a global class that applies to whole report.
@item
colhead describes how to format the descriptions at the top of each
column.
@item
number describes the formatting for any number in your array.
@item
page-head describes how the head lines will appear.
@item
initial block is for the report ID, author and creation date that
appear in a distinctive block.
@end itemize

   All of these classes are included in the default style sheet.  You
may not like the results if they are omitted from the published style
sheet.

@node Other Tweaks
@section Other Tweaks

@itemize @bullet
@item
Initials.  Use 'wpŌłåsetInitialFlag 0' to remove the initial block
from the report.
@end itemize

@node Distances
@section Distances

Many properties are looking for a distance.  Distances can be fixed,
relative or percentages (a number followed by %).  There should be no
white space between the amount the the measure.

Fixed distances can be measured in:

@itemize @bullet
@item
pt (points) or 1/72 of an inch.  Fonts are measured in points.
@item
pc (picas) or 12pt
@item
mm (millimeters)
@item
cm (centimeters)
@item
in (inches)
@end itemize

Relative units are determined by the font:

@itemize @bullet
@item
em is the width of the capital M. This should be the point size of
the font and the distance between baselines.
@item
ex is the height of the letter x.  This should be the base line and
the mean line of lower case letters.
@item
px (pixels).  This is more of a measure for monitors than printers.
@end itemize

@example
You may be thinking that because elements on web pages are
measured in numbers of pixels, and because pixels are
considered a relative measurement, that they are the answer to
all font size problems.  It would be nice if the were.  For
some designers, control over text at the pixel level is
intoxicating.
@end example

-- _Jennifer Niederst Robbins, Web Design in a Nutshell, O'Reilly_

